[Music]
Hi everyone, welcome to another bonus feature
of "Nose to Sing as a Fish" which is... what is it this week? It's me?
Oh, damn. Oh, sorry. I thought you were... That was my big moment. I thought you were actually
grasping. Do I do this to you every week when you sit up doing the intro?
No, you usually eat a biscuit or you usually open a fucking noisy soft drink.
You know what I noticed recently is... sorry, Jack, we'll introduce you in a second.
Yeah, no worries. But like we used to whenever you did the intro,
me and Andy would try to put you off every week. Every time.
But when we had guests over the last year, because Anna wasn't here,
we kind of... we thought it was rude, so we stopped doing it, but we're definitely going to do it again.
Anyway, what am I talking about? This is Meet the Elves. It's where we meet one of our lovely friends
and colleagues who work for QI, and they ask us a fiendish question, and we spend 50 minutes or so
fumbling in the dark around the answer, and then they eventually have to tell us the answer,
and then we all go home. But if one of us guesses the answer straight off the bat,
it'll be a 30-second show. So fingers crossed. Pressure's on, Jack. And I feel like I've kind of
spoiled who the elf is this week. But it is Jack Chambers, who, those of you who are on our Discord,
will know as the person who edited last week's compilation, and actually quite a lot of our
compilations. You caused quite a stir, Jack, because you included Anna screwing up the ending of a
show, and they all thought it was extremely funny. Oh, no, the veil was lifted, wasn't it?
Which one was the show? It was the one where you did the final bit of the show, and you said,
"Hello!" I always confuse hello and goodbye. It's one of my big blinds. But anyway, everyone loved it,
and I might have let slip that, Jack, you edited that. And in fact, you edit all our compilations,
don't you? Yeah, I mean, I left that one in, because it was so funny, and I forget that the,
to preserve the sort of the edifice that is the podcast, and the idea that it's all slick and
unedited. That's what you get as the Discordians. You get the... The mess. The bloopers. That's what
they're after. The bloopers, yeah, exactly. So, Jack, you have been at QI for a number of years now.
You are a senior researcher in the QI team, and you have brought for us a question. Absolutely,
I've been here six years. I feel like this is the pinnacle of my six years of research. Have you
been doing this? Oh, yeah. I've been wondering what you've been doing for the last six years.
How long have you been sitting on this question? Honestly, only when I found out I was doing this
last week, but it's a long time in the making, which is your first clue. So, my question to you is,
what is the worst year ever? It's often considered the worst year... Is that a question?
Are you ripping the piss out of my accent there? No, no, no, no, no. The worst year ever? Okay.
Well, 2020. Hang on, it's not the end of your question. It's not like you're going to have a
follow-up. That's it. Well, no, just like, what's the worst year to be a human alive around, possibly
even because the subsequent years were even worse. It's the start of some... Something which was bad
to start off with and then got... How long have you been at QI? Six years, did you say? Six years.
I started in, yeah, 2018. So, 2016 is acknowledged as the... Off-cited. The death of Bowie, the death of
quite a few... That's all I remember now. So many great people died. Prince Muhammad Ali, Fidel Castro,
who I always include in this list. So many great people died. And then there was Trump and then
Brexit, who, depending on your political standpoint, were either bad or good things. But obviously,
that was much better than it was being alive 100 years ago and then 100 years before that was worse
and 100 years before that was worse. Obviously, it's got to be pre-2014 because no year could be
the worst with fish around, you know. Okay. Well done. All right, you can get a piece.
So, yeah, like for me, 2020, a lot of people would say that because of COVID and stuff.
But yeah, 2016 was supposed to be a time when something changed. We went on to a different
timeline and everything got terrible, wasn't it? It's like David Bowie died and it's like,
okay, now we're in the worst timeline ever. About 15 years ago, we thought it would happen in 2012
because of the Mayans. Oh, yeah. So some people think maybe it was just four years delayed.
And then 2000 because of the Y2K scare. Yeah, which we'll say wasn't really a big deal.
No, but the anxiety leading up to it gave a lot of people a bad year that year.
Did it? Yeah. 1987, Coventry City winning the FA Cup.
That was the worst time. I remember that. Well, that's the first one you've mentioned
that is an a leap year. And that might be, I mean, that is not clean.
What? 2012, 2016, 2020, obviously the pandemic. They're often cited as the worst years.
Although obviously in human history, we've just been getting happier and happier and better off
and better off, blah, blah, blah. Obviously, we're getting much wealthier. Everyone's happier.
So I think that's been happening since the dawn of agriculture.
So I think that was the pits just round about 8,000 years ago when agriculture was bedding in.
So everyone was getting really sick, living close quarters, but they had no medicine.
Their diets were getting much worse. And they'd lost all that freedom of being hunter-gatherers.
I was here earlier, like the Tripelian culture that we mentioned in Ukraine.
You remember? No, I've got a very bad memory of it. Was it more than a day ago?
It's the one where they burned the houses down. Oh, yeah, yeah, right.
They burned the houses down, yeah. Well, that's not pretty fun.
I'm going to go the opposite angle. Is it 2025?
And it's the idea that every subsequent year is the worst year. So once we hit 2025, 2026,
in terms of the state of the planet, the everything that's...
Yes, because what people have been saying is like, we started off with, you know, David Cameron.
And then we went to Theresa May, who people thought was the worst prime minister.
And then we went to Boris Johnson, who people thought was the worst prime minister.
Then we went to Liz Truss, and everyone thought things can't get worse than this.
And now some political analysts are saying that Rishi Sunak is even worse,
and that perhaps we're just going to get worse and worse and worse,
until we have a slime mold as our prime minister. Yeah.
I look forward to you explaining that to the person dying of cholera 2,000 years ago.
Actually, we have a worse year, because our prime minister makes his own buses at home or claims to.
Can I ask Jack, sorry, we talked about 2000 earlier, Y2K, millennium.
How old were you at the millennium? I was six when it turned 2000.
So you weren't partying. No, no, no. I went to the South Bank.
I remember I was sat on my dad's shoulders and I had a whistle.
And I swore every time I heard someone whistle, I'd respond back with my own whistle.
And I was sure I could sort of communicate with these strangers.
Can I ask a question? Yes.
Which is, in way of a clue, is this something to do with an area of interest of yours?
So I know you're a very zen, you're very foodie, you go to South Africa a lot.
Is it anything wrapped up in who you are?
I know. Other than my, you have a mustache as an elf.
Okay. Is this a personal theory?
No, actually. I mean, it was a theory proposed in 2018
by a man called Michael McCormick. So if you know who he is.
Michael McCormick.
Okay. Going off the fact that you're a foodie.
Even though he said it's nothing to do with that.
Everybody eats food throughout human history.
But my question is, can you give us an example of what someone living at this time might have eaten?
Oh, fantastic.
Is that too much for a clue?
That's great.
Well, obviously, if they're in Peru, they might be eating quinoa,
but if they're in Britain, they wouldn't be.
So you've also got to narrow it down to be a geography.
That's fair enough, because when was quinoa domesticated?
Well, that's true.
So it must have been, I'm going to narrow it down now to somewhere between 500 AD and 1500 AD.
I think poor old Jack might have just been going
Spanish actions into the Americas, rather than the domestication of quinoa.
So, okay, there's a clue. It's pre-Columbian exchange.
I think Anna's going down the right lines.
So what year are we talking about?
Several hundreds of years.
1492.
Can I ask a question about the parameters of this?
Of course.
When it says the worst year, this bloke says the worst year, Michael McIntyre would ever say is the best.
I think it would be better as a Peter K.
Who remembers the worst year?
What a terrible year that was.
Yeah, so Peter K's theory about the worst year.
Is it, in terms of globally, the average happiness was bad,
or was it one particular person had an absolute shocker?
Or was it a whole country?
Is it about the most people were most unhappy for the most amount of time?
I think the latter, yes.
I think, obviously, it's hard to measure objectively misery.
But certainly in terms of all the areas where there were people writing things down,
i.e. we have records for, were pretty miserable.
And for humans?
He doesn't care about others.
The dinosaurs had a bit of a shocking one about 55 million years ago.
I'm going to now narrow it down to when we had people writing things down.
So the old monks, sir.
But also another clue, I suppose, 8,000 years ago,
we probably can't be too specific to a specific year.
Can I throw out a word here?
Yes.
Plague.
Plague is a good word to use.
Oh, okay.
Okay, was there a big one around around that time?
1665, the Great Plague in London.
And there had been around that time previously,
in previous decades, quite a lot of plague in Europe.
Black Death.
1349, 14th century.
Yeah.
Which is in the right territory, right?
Because we're going pre-1492.
Yeah.
Is that right?
That was bad, and that spread a long way.
There was that big sort of plague in Roman times,
so we're not really sure what it was,
but it was caused by people kissing each other.
And they all got really disfigured
and they banned kissing for a while.
Didn't need to, because they're all disfigured by then.
Yeah, no one wanted to stop them.
No one wanted to.
You're dancing around it, I think.
Okay, let's keep, we can narrow this down.
So it's not the Black Death?
It's not the Black Death.
Is it a single year we're looking for?
Yes.
1491.
1490.
No.
Okay, so let's say...
Think back to episode 425 of No Such Things as a Fish.
Oh, God.
If you, yeah, it just comes to your mind.
The title of it was No Such Thing as the Ken Ages.
So this happened in the Ken Ages.
Yes, I remember this episode.
I do.
I actually do.
So the Dark Ages, so it's between,
it ended with the Renaissance
and it started when the Romans left.
Yeah, about 400.
We're still on the broad.
Yeah, it's still on the broad.
We actually broadened it up.
Okay, so like a play gear.
For me, I think we have to be talking 1300s.
Sure.
Well, have we narrowed it down close enough there?
No.
Is the number a number we would know?
666.
No, no, it's not a significant number.
Although it is, I looked into the number
and it is the lowest happy number that begins with a five.
Wait a minute.
What's a happy number?
So wait a minute.
Can I just?
If you're mathematical, you can work this out.
It's a happy number is one where you square all the digits
and then add them together
and then square all the digits
and keep adding them together until they reach one.
525.
Oh, close.
526.
No, no, it can't be that.
Tell me what a happy number is again
because it's not making me happy right now.
It's just trying to think about what you just said.
13 is a number that's happy
because you do one square plus three squared,
which is 10.
And then you do one square plus zero square
to get us back to one.
And once you're at one, it just iterates forever.
I'm not sure that helped time a very much.
Yeah.
I'm just going to pack my stuff up.
Sorry, I'm tapping out of this.
So you get the digits of the number
and you square each of them and you add them together.
Right, 10, yeah.
So 13, you get one square plus three squares.
Yeah, that's 10.
Which is 10.
And then you do it again.
Yeah.
So you do one square plus zero square, but she's one.
Why you do one square plus two?
Oh, the numbers of 10, you do one square plus zero square,
which is one.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, sorry.
Oh, can you want to get back down to one?
And you keep that, once it's at one,
it keeps giving the answer one.
I see.
Can I phone a friend?
Can we call Matt Parker?
Who do you ring Matt Parker?
Yeah, that's fine.
If it was 580, it would be five squared plus eight square
plus zero squared is a number where then you add the squares
of them and it makes one.
OK.
It might be lower.
It could be in the 50s, I suppose.
No, it's in the 500.
It's in the 500.
OK, can I also ask?
Yeah.
Happy numbers is 69 a happy number.
I haven't actually done that.
I'll quickly try and the 36 plus 81 is 117.
117.
So, one, two.
505.
No.
Give a clue that I can, I can't, I'm gone.
I have no idea how to get involved in this.
Like, what's a, is it like a bus route number or like a week?
Yeah, it'll say a time of day, I suppose.
OK.
But then that annual just less than 60.
But it's between five o'clock and six o'clock.
Yeah, exactly.
Exactly.
OK, but it can't be over 560, though.
That's good.
515.
That is true.
Right.
I mean, are you enjoying this?
Because I can just give you the number.
516.
Right.
OK.
Think of another way now.
OK, let's remove the five.
Yep.
Now we're looking for a two digits number.
OK, yeah, yeah.
Great.
OK, do that.
That's good thinking.
That's one.
Nice one.
Give us a clue to this.
Is it one of our ages?
Um, I couldn't hasten the guess, but...
OK, but it's OK.
21, 23 and 27.
[LAUGHTER]
But you poor, so that does imply it's not under 20,
being realistic.
This is like a, let's do a fingers on buzzers moment.
Give us just one outrageously close clue
and just see you guess to it.
It's the square number.
Oh, what the hell?
527.
49.
How does that help?
509.
536.
Yes, James, got it.
536 is the worst year.
I can't believe.
I know, poor dad said, talk to me in my own language.
All I needed was a double digit or anything to work that out.
Well, actually, me and James went to the University of Sheffield
not at the same time, but also to study maths.
So I have a maths degree.
And actually, you were talking last time on media,
it was about bar one being the longest bar in the country.
Oh, yeah.
So I would have been propping that up.
Or bar one.
No, it's called bar one.
No, it's just bar one.
Oh, right.
And I think it's still the longest student bar in the country.
Yeah.
Right.
Anyway, so we're quite mathematically biased.
I'm sorry, Dan.
That was like Oxbridge.
[LAUGHTER]
That was like you wanted...
Oxbridge, say it's a square number between 1 and 100.
No, it was, I mean, like fraternities.
You wanted your old Sheffield.
Yeah, yeah, exactly.
The in-crew of it here.
So you can both go back to bar one and two.
Yeah, we won the little BPLs.
Go and haze each other next door,
down that normal conversation.
So can you tell us what is so shit about year 536?
Yeah, what can we say about 536?
Yeah, you guys might be able to guess what was bad about it.
Well, we already said there's loads of plague.
Yeah, plague is, but that's not the main problem with 536.
Is it war-related?
Kind of.
I thought there was a war going on between the Byzantines
and the Ostrogoths.
Oh, yeah, those fucking Ostrogoths.
Also, it's a square number.
That's...
Well, 36 is.
Yeah, 536.
Yeah, yeah, no, I was talking about the 36 bit.
The happy number.
Yeah.
Yeah, actually, it's ironic, isn't it, though?
It's the happy number.
Yeah, that's why I thought to mention it.
I see why you said it now.
[LAUGHTER]
Can I ask, please, was there lots of natural disasters?
There was, or one in particular.
In not the big one in Lisbon.
There was a big one later, but...
There was a big one later.
Lisbon's had a few, but no, this was not an earthquake.
The year that the bottom half of the earth dropped off.
[LAUGHTER]
And they all died.
We had to rebuild the whole thing.
Had to reattach Australia, didn't they?
Was it a big volcanic eruption somewhere?
Yes.
Tambora.
No, that was 1816.
Travatoa.
No, that was late.
Etna.
Etna, no.
The one in Bali.
Did Vesuvius do one?
Well, actually, you'll be here for hours
because we actually don't know where it was.
But basically, 536, there was a big eruption
summer in the world.
And it spewed enough particulate matter
that there were 18 months where the sun didn't shine.
So we know about Tambora, which is 1815.
And then the subsequent year was the year without summer.
Do you remember that year that Rihanna's umbrella came out?
Oh, yeah.
And it rained for about four months.
Which was the worst year ever, wasn't it?
It was like that.
Yeah, it was.
1816, as the sun was so hidden behind particulate matter
that all the crops failed.
And it was like two degrees colder than normal.
And this is exactly what happened in 536.
And are we just assuming 536 was even worse
because everyone was just poorer and--
Well, yeah.
And we had less agricultural know-how.
We don't know where the eruption was.
No.
Why do we know there was an eruption that caused this?
People just, people just write, oh, it's gone dark for a year.
Yes, people did write that.
And they wrote that across the Middle East and in Europe.
And there was a famine in Ireland and poverty and war in Sweden.
And it snowed in China in the summer.
Anyway, we knew that there was something strange going on.
What's changed is in 2018, we analyzed some ice cores
that were taken from Greenland in, I think, the '90s.
And what's changed is we've now got the technology
to get much finer slices.
So previously, we could--
Because obviously the depth of your ice core slice
is a measure of the precision.
So you could only ever get to within a decade or so.
And what we're saying is that by looking at ice core slices,
you're looking at the imprint that--
Yes, sorry.
--history is left on a bit of ice, right?
So we noticed there was a large amount of sulfur
that happened sometime in the mid-sixth century.
And now we've been able to slice them into 120 microns thick.
And so we can pinpoint things to within a few weeks.
That is amazing, isn't it?
Because they knew that it happened this terrible time.
It happened sometime in a year beginning with five.
But they just, for years and years,
they were just scrambling around
trying to find out what this year was.
And eventually they got that.
That's incredible.
So five-thirty-six, an eruption happened.
And then there was a guy called Procopius,
who was Byzantine chronicler.
And he said that the sun--
It just looked really weedy.
It looked like the moon, even in the middle of the day.
And--
Like it does on most British spring and water days.
I don't know if people noticed in Ireland, actually.
And at the time, Constantinople was the biggest city
in the world, actually.
Even though its population is less than modern-day Sheffield.
And obviously, people in South America
or Africa might have had a fine time about it.
But they didn't write things down,
and we don't have the records.
So, yes, so Procopius and a few Chinese and Middle Eastern sources,
one guy who went through Palestine.
But he was describing what also happened in the same year,
bubonic plague.
It was the first time.
And it was known as the Justinian plague,
because Justinian I was in charge of Constantinople
and the Byzantine Empire.
Right.
Coral Justinian.
I don't want that named after--
Well, exactly.
It's a bit like Spanish flu.
Undeserved.
He didn't bring it.
No.
Or the China plague.
China virus.
Anyway, that kicked off in 541.
But we've also discovered that there were
subsequent volcanic eruptions in 540 and 547.
The decade between 536 and 547
is the coldest we have on record for 2,500 years.
Is it really?
Oh, yeah.
And it was known as the late antiquity Little Ice Age.
Or Lallia.
God, it's really interesting.
I mean, I've got to say, I prefer Michael's stuff
about the mandrel.
But that's pretty, pretty bloody good.
And it's kind of long enough ago
that it's a bit obscured in history,
but also there are written sources,
so we can kind of piece things together.
And multiple independent sources,
talking about eclipses and famines.
I love that.
I love when the way that sometimes people looking out
when supernovas might have been witnessed on Earth and stuff,
they have to then put a call out, you know,
here's NASA calling out to the world of archaeology to say,
has anyone found any weird rock art that kind of suggests
that there was something weird in the sky and stuff?
And they can date it through all these different--
it's just our ability to date is just getting--
Yeah, it's like there's someone in a library with a text
next to someone holding an iceberg,
and next to someone with a cave painting.
OK, if we piece these together.
I came across this article in The Guardian
where there was a much wider long read
about basically forensic science has got so good
that now archaeology isn't about relying on written sources
and hunches and lining things up,
is you can actually get DNA from people
who are alive hundreds of thousands of years ago,
and isotopes and carbon dating,
and all this has come on a leaps and bounds
in the last 10, 15 years.
And it's kind of changing the idea of what history is
because it's been sort of diluted by science.
It's going to turn out we were all wrong about everything,
isn't it?
Yeah, probably.
The retraction special for the fish is going to be going on.
Tudors didn't exist, it turns out.
Yeah, no, we've radiocarbon dated bars, and no.
Also, interestingly, the second largest earthquake
ever recorded was in Alaska in 1964.
It happened at 5.36pm.
Gow, spooky.
You kidding?
No, no, no.
You have blown this shit wide open.
That's what we do.
But yeah, I also actually re-watched an episode
of QI from the J series,
and we were talking about those dubious theories,
do you remember those?
Oh, yeah.
And one of them was that the Dark Ages didn't exist.
Yeah, Phantom Time Hypothesis.
Phantom Time Hypothesis.
And I remember watching that when I was much younger
and thinking, oh, that's quite an interesting argument,
and obviously it's basically been debunked.
But... Episode three or four of Fish.
Yeah, when Greg Jenner came up.
Greg Jenner and Alex Edelman were on it.
Yeah.
And then just to call back to the start of this episode,
when our episode was called No Such Thing as a Ken Ages,
can I just check there weren't any Ken Ages?
No, it was...
Was that a joke that we made?
It was a joke that we made.
Got it.
So it was the Dark Ages,
and no one really calls it the Dark Ages anymore,
apart from one guy called Ken Dark.
Well remembered.
There was a joke one of us said,
which is, "I took Ken Ages."
I can't remember what it was, yeah.
Was it as well-delivered as that whole...
No, no, no, that was good.
I was pulling it back.
I didn't know how it was made.
I think we should edit that moment into...
Okay, guys, okay, guys.
I think we've come to the natural end of this episode
of Meet the Elves.
Thank you so much, Jack, for your question.
And no problem.
I can't wait to hear the edit that you might do,
even, of that five and a half minutes
where we just said numbers.
Can people get in touch with you on social media or not?
They can, if they want to.
I have an Instagram called Interesting Pieces of Metal,
and it's me posting pieces of metal that I've found on the street.
And I also run the quite well-meaning Twitter account,
or ex-account, as it's now called,
which is all the facts that I think are kind of like anti-jokes.
What's that one called?
It's called At Quite Wellming.
It's so annoying because these are now going to become
our two most popular social media accounts.
But other than that, no, I think I'm not frequently on social media.
Fair enough.
As seems to be the case of young people so much these days,
it is the last bastion of us old folk.
But no, thank you very much, Jack, for coming on the show.
I'm sure we'll see you on this again soon.
And I'm on Instagram every day, every moment, every hour.
I'm saying hi.
Thank you, Stan and Anna.
And we will see you all for another piece of bonus material
again in a couple of weeks.
And as Andrew Hunter-Murray would say, bye.
Bye.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
(upbeat music)